Cape Canaveral this is not.But here, down toward the coast, on a spit of land past the Border Patrol checkpoint, where the Rio Grande meets the Gulf of Mexico, there is a spaceship being assembled off State Highway 4 just before it dead-ends into the sea.Towering and stainless-steel shiny, it looks like a surreal sculpture amid the cactuses, yucca and relentless South Texas sun. And, because it’s being built not in a factory but out in the open, it’s become a roadside attraction, drawing gawkers to an area so remote that the county trucks in drinking water once a month to the few who live nearby.They’re coming to see Elon Musk’s latest creation, a prototype called Starship that he hopes will one day carry people by the dozens to the moon and Mars. Musk, in a presentation here Saturday, said his goal of building a “rapidly reusable spacecraft” here would lead to the fulfillment of his ultimate goal of creating “a city on Mars.” But first, he’ll need to pull off another improbable feat, building a private, commercial spaceport here, in what the top local elected official called a “mind-boggling” juxtaposition: SpaceX, one of the hottest companies in the world, led by a Silicon Valley celebrity with nearly 29 million Twitter followers, building a rocket in a border town where nearly a third of the residents live below the poverty line.“I never in a million years would have imagined it,” said Cameron County Judge Eddie Treviño Jr. Five years ago, SpaceX started building a launchpad here, hauling in dirt by the ton, that would allow the company a measure of freedom without the restraints that come with shooting rockets off from government sites, such as Cape Canaveral or Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, where several other companies operate. “This is really going to be a new kind of spaceport that is optimized for commercial operations,” Musk said during a groundbreaking ceremony in 2014. “Cape Canaveral and Cape Vandenberg are great launch sites, but they are military launch sites.”The company has been welcomed by local officials as a Walt Disney-like messiah that would help spark an economic revival in an area that desperately needs it. The state set aside $15.3 million to help the company build its facilities here and has bought into SpaceX’s vision to transform the area into a commercial spaceport that would be sending people throughout the solar system.“You know the term ‘visionary’; they’re the ones who make the world go 'round,” Treviño said. Outside the county courthouse, the downtown here is replete with boarded-up businesses. Real estate prices are depressed. Schools are surrounded by security fences. For years, the area has been caught in an unending “vicious cycle,” Treviño said, so bad that people who “are fortunate to get a college education or a postgraduate degree don’t come back.” While he knows SpaceX’s presence has led to “growing pains,” he said those are merely the turbulent spasms of progress in an area that has seen very little. But now, across the water on South Padre Island, the county has spent about $31 million building new pavilions and an amphitheater that would host concerts and weddings and make a prime viewing area for rocket launches. Local officials hope for a future where residents and tourists line the beach, the way they have for years along Florida’s Space Coast, cheering rockets as they tear through the sky.“It’s exciting,” said Sofia Benavides, a county commissioner who represents Boca Chica. “I’m 69 years old and have never been to a rocket launch. For my children and grandchildren, it’s great that this is happening in their backyard.” Not everyone is cheering, though. A handful of residents who live next door to SpaceX’s facilities recently received letters from SpaceX, which said the company’s footprint in the area was going to be bigger and more disruptive than originally imagined. As a result, it was seeking to purchase their properties at three times the value determined by an appraiser hired by SpaceX. The deal was nonnegotiable, the letter said, and the company wanted an answer within two weeks, although some have received extensions. Called Boca Chica Village, the area is made up of about 30 homes within walking distance of the Gulf of Mexico, occupied mostly seasonally. Many are boarded up. A few have weeds as high as the mailboxes. The few full-time residents moved here seeking an end-of-the-road refuge. It’s nothing fancy — an outpost with little more than surf and sun and spotty cell reception, where fishermen drive their trucks up on the beach. There’s no running water, so the county brings in giant water tanks for residents once a month. Ray Pointer discovered the area by accident in 2002. He was trying to make his way to South Padre Island, the resort town just to the north but, instead, made a wrong turn, ended up in Boca Chica and decided he had found an oasis where he would plant his flag. His neighbor Bonnie Heaton moved to Boca Chica 18 years ago from Minnesota with her husband after they retired. It was a place so desolate and tranquil she recalled the UPS delivery man once saying, “I didn’t know anyone lived out here.”“We came across this place and never left,” she said.The letter from SpaceX, then, came as a shock, one that she said felt like “a hostile takeover.”
“The thought of a company that’s going to shoot a rocket to the moon or Mars, that’s exciting, that’s history,” she said. “But when you get to the other side of the coin, and you lose your house, it’s terrifying.”Ray Pointer and his wife, Maria, feel the same way. They were offered $233,000 for their home, Ray Pointer, 72, said, a figure he believes is outlandishly low. (Zillow estimates the value of their home at $103,655.)“To tell me to leave and not really compensate me is unconscionable,” he said. “It’s not fair. It’s not the right thing to do. SpaceX is better than that.”While many of their neighbors, who don’t live in Boca Chica year round, have taken the offer, they continue to try to negotiate.To Treviño and other local officials, moving a few residents is a small price to pay to make way for SpaceX and its starry ambitions.“We have to think big-picture,” Treviño said. “And the fact that an individual with the vision like Elon Musk is investing his time, his money and his efforts to build his dream of launching to the moon and Mars here — it’s important that we be a part of that.” SpaceX chose the area because of its location and comparative desolation — you want to launch rockets near the equator and over unpopulated areas. On Saturday night, Musk was here himself, to show off the rocket his team had been working to complete and to discuss his vision of the future. As for the rocket ranch he is building, he said it would continue to grow with more buildings and increased activity that forced the company to buy out residents’ property.Initially, SpaceX had intended to launch its Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy rockets from here. But as the concept for Starship began to form in his imagination, he decided to switch gears and make Boca Chica home to the new, massive rocket he hopes will take people deep into the solar system. “I think there will be a lot more buildings and a lot more stuff — way more stuff than is currently here,” he said. A sense of urgency to get Starship built led the company to do it in the ramshackle way it has — outside, without a factory in sight, in a barren setting fit for Star Wars that, as he wrote on Twitter earlier this month, could be labeled “Droid Junkyard, Tatooine.” “Since it was going to take too long to build the buildings we built [Starship] outside,” he said. “My new thing is management by rhyming: If the schedule is long, it’s wrong; if it’s tight, it’s right.”Most of the presentation focused on technical details, the benefits of stainless steel vs. carbon composites (“I’m in love with steel,” he said at one point), orbital mechanics, reentry vectors (“It’ll look totally nuts to see this thing land.”), the importance of orbital refueling and a future where humanity is “out among the stars.”“The critical breakthrough that’s needed for us to become a spacefaring civilization is to make space travel like air travel,” Musk said. The first flight of the test vehicle — which looks as if it were born from a collaboration between Wernher von Braun, the designer of the Saturn V Apollo-era rocket, and Frank Gehry, the modernist architect — would come within a couple of months, he said, a short, suborbital hop to about 12 miles high.Saturday’s presentation was the latest in a series of grand space talks that Musk’s fans have lauded as visionary and critics have derided as fantasy. But for all the hype SpaceX has received, and for the myriad times Musk has talked about making humanity a “multi-planet species,” it still has not flown a single human being anywhere, let alone the moon or to Mars.All the talk, then, of futuristic spaceships and deep space exploration rubbed NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine the wrong way. SpaceX is preparing to fly NASA astronauts to the International Space Station under a contract worth $2.6 billion. SpaceX, like Boeing, the other company hired to fly astronauts to the station, is years behind schedule. And in April, SpaceX’s Crew Dragon capsule, designed to carry the crews, exploded during a test of its emergency abort engines.In a tweet Friday, Bridenstine took the bold and unusual step of firing a shot at the company, saying that while he was looking forward to SpaceX’s announcement, the agency “expects to see the same level of enthusiasm focused on the investments of the American taxpayer. It’s time to deliver.” In response Saturday, Musk said that the company’s “resources are overwhelmingly on Falcon and Dragon,” the rocket and spacecraft that would be used to fly NASA astronauts. And company officials stressed that flying NASA’s astronauts is SpaceX’s top priority. But Musk’s focus is clearly on the next-generation spacecraft he has been envisioning for years, one that has gone through multiple iterations and is still evolving, a stubborn problem not fully solved.
Meantime, Bonnie Heaton wonders where she’ll go next and whether she’ll ever be able to afford another place so close to the water, where during the evening, the “sun melts into the ocean,” she said. There is one thing she knows for sure, though: “I don’t want to go to Mars. Let him do that.”Mary McConnaughey was watching from her car when the rocket exploded on the beach. The steel-crunching burst sent the top of the spacecraft flying, and a cloud of vapor billowed into the sky and drifted toward the water.
McConnaughey and her husband had planned to drive into town that day in late November, but when they pulled out onto the street, they noticed a roadblock, a clear sign that SpaceX technicians were preparing to test hardware. She didn’t want to miss anything, so she turned toward the launchpad, parked her car at the end of a nearby street, and got her camera ready.The dramatic test was a crucial step in one of Elon Musk’s most cherished and ambitious projects, the very reason, in fact, he founded SpaceX in 2002. Weeks earlier, Musk had stood in front of the prototype—164 feet of gleaming stainless steel, so archetypically spaceship-like that it could have been a borrowed prop from a science-fiction movie—and beamed. He envisions that the completed transportation system, a spaceship-and-rocket combo named Starship, will carry passengers as far away as Mars. A few months before the explosion, hundreds of people came to the facility in South Texas, on the edge of the Gulf Coast, to see the spaceship, and thousands more watched online. “It’s really gonna be pretty epic to see that thing take off and come back,” Musk gushed at the event, as if he were seeing the finished Starship in front of him.McConnaughey was there, and even posed for a picture with Musk. At the end of the night, she made the short trip home to her house on a small road lined with stout palm trees. McConnaughey lives in Boca Chica Village, a tiny neighborhood located in startling proximity to SpaceX’s facilities. Many of the village’s residents have lived there for years, long before SpaceX arrived, some before the company even existed.Friction between next-door neighbors is quite different when one of them is a rocket company. Instead of an ugly fence, there might be an ugly fence with massive tanks of cryogenic liquid behind it. When residents find papers stuck in their front door, the notes don’t ask them to keep the noise down or clean up after their dogs; they warn them that their windows could shatter. Boca Chica’s residents have learned to live with a rocket company, or at least tolerate it, over more than five years. But SpaceX’s work is about to become even more disruptive. (The explosion certainly made that clear.) So the company has offered to buy their homes. Some have taken the offer. Others, such as McConnaughey, have rejected it, even as Musk prepares to launch a giant rocketship just a short hop from their houses. SpaceX is already hard at work on the next Starship prototype, and Musk says the company might launch it into orbit as soon as this year. “We love Texas,” James Gleeson, a SpaceX spokesperson, said in a statement, “and believe we are entering a new and exciting era in space exploration.” Few people in this part of South Texas could have predicted the recent trajectory of their life when SpaceX moved in. They have become space fanatics and legal experts, Musk supporters and thorns in his side, trying to make sense of their place in a strange story that could someday end millions of miles away from Earth. All because they got new neighbors.“They’re here to stay,” McConnaughey told me, “and they want us to leave.” Boca Chica is an unincorporated community of about 40 houses, mostly one-story homes with soft-orange brick exteriors, on the southernmost tip of Texas. There are no shops or restaurants or amenities of any kind around, including municipal water pipes; Cameron County regularly trucks in gallons of water, which is stored in outdoor tanks. Many residents are retired; they spend summers in northern states and flock south for the winter like migratory birds, eager for the peaceful stillness of the coastline.The only way to reach the village is via State Highway 4, a two-lane road that runs through mostly empty land. It originates to the west, in the city of Brownsville, and disappears into the shores of Boca Chica Beach, an eight-mile stretch of unspoiled sand, free of boardwalks and souvenir shops. About three miles south, through thick desert brush, is the Rio Grande, winding like a curled ribbon along the border. On a clear day in the village, you can see straight to Mexico.The residents of Boca Chica first learned of SpaceX’s plans at a public meeting in the spring of 2012. SpaceX was preparing to fly cargo for NASA to the International Space Station for the first time, and in anticipation of increased demand for the company’s services, Musk wanted to build “a commercial Cape Canaveral”—a launch site all SpaceX’s own, where Falcon 9 rockets could fly as many as 12 times a year. South Texas was one of several areas under consideration, in part because of its proximity to the planet’s equator, which spins faster than the poles, providing departing rockets with an extra boost. SpaceX also has a long history in Texas; it has tested rocket engines at a facility in McGregor, north of Austin, for nearly two decades.Hundreds of people went to the meeting in Brownsville, according to The Brownsville Herald. Some had concerns about the local fauna—Boca Chica sits in a national wildlife refuge, where each year more than 500 species of migratory birds funnel through and sea turtles come ashore to lay their eggs. But most people spoke in support of the project, which SpaceX promised would bring hundreds of jobs to the area. To residents of Boca Chica Village, the whole thing felt like a pep rally. For Brownsville, one of the poorest cities in the country, SpaceX seemed to offer an unlikely dream: the opportunity to turn a border town into a 21st-century space city.“Most of the kids that are fortunate enough to get a college education usually leave the area and they don’t come back,” Eddie Treviño, the county judge for Cameron County, told me. Treviño grew up in Brownsville, left for college, and then returned for good. “SpaceX may draw kids to either come back or maybe to stay,” he said.A few days earlier, SpaceX had bought its first piece of land from the county. Texas had heavily courted SpaceX since 2011 with millions of dollars in incentives and legislation that would limit public access to beaches along the Gulf. SpaceX, the thinking went, could commandeer the coastline as needed. A review by the Federal Aviation Administration eventually found that rocket operations wouldn’t cause any “significant” environmental impacts, clearing the way for SpaceX to get started. In the spring of 2013, hundreds of people showed up to another meeting, some in Launch Brownsville T-shirts, and a state official read aloud a letter of support from then-Governor Rick Perry.Company reps did try to reassure the few villagers who attended the meeting about being so close to a launch site. “They said that we would be okay, that we wouldn’t even have to wear hearing protection,” McConnaughey said. “They wanted to be good neighbors.” SpaceX broke ground at the beach in the fall of 2014, and soon trucks made daily trips into Boca Chica, packed with soil that would provide a sturdy foundation for a launchpad on a bedrock-less shore, less than two miles from the village. State Highway 4, unaccustomed to so much traffic, stretched and cracked, so crews from the Texas Department of Transportation followed, patching the holes. A pair of massive antennae, shaped like mushrooms and larger than buildings, were shipped in from Cape Canaveral to track SpaceX missions.McConnaughey found herself spending hours outside nearly every day, a camera dangling from her shoulder. She had never considered herself a photographer, and usually got behind the lens only on family vacations. Now she was snapping pictures of hardware and sweaty technicians, like a wildlife photographer angling to capture an elusive creature. She posted the photos to a forum on nasaspaceflight.com, a community for space fans, with a watermark of her username, BocaChicaGal, in pink font. She learned a new language, writing on the forum—and eventually to her thousands of new Twitter followers—about leg mounts and bulkheads and stainless-steel coils. She learned to look for signs of activity, such as a raised construction crane, and stayed when she saw them, sending her husband into town to run errands without her. She usually goes to Michigan during scorching Texas summers, but she stayed put last year, intent on capturing the activity.“A lot of it is just right place, right time, being observant,” McConnaughey said. “You have to pay attention to what’s going on. You just have to be patient and ready and wait.”Elsewhere, SpaceX was making progress—punctuated by a fiery blaze or two. A Falcon 9 rocket exploded during takeoff. The company recovered a rocket booster after launching it into orbit, gently guiding it back to the ground, an industry first. Then another rocket blew up. The company got better at reusing boosters and returning them in one piece. In Florida, the inaugural launch of the Falcon Heavy, the most powerful rocket in operation today, was a milestone for SpaceX, and, it turned out, for Boca Chica Village. “I think it gives me a lot of faith for our next architecture, our interplanetary spaceship,” Musk said at a press conference after the launch in 2018. Forget about routine Falcon 9 launches; he wanted to test this new vehicle, the Starship, at the company’s location in South Texas.“We’ve got a lot of land with nobody around, so if it blows up, it’s cool,” Musk said. That December, a mysterious tower rose at SpaceX’s construction site in Boca Chica. Users on nasaspaceflight.com exchanged guesses about what the cylinder of patched-together metal could be. A water tower, probably. But then workers sliced holes into the structure and gave it legs.Gene Gore drove over early one morning. The sun hadn’t yet risen when he saw a gleam in the dark, next to the mystery structure. “I’d never seen a rocket, but it looked like the nose cone of a rocket,” Gore told me. “That was the first time anybody had seen it. And then it was apparent. Oh, they really are building a rocket here.” Gore, a South Texas native, has run a surfing company on nearby South Padre Island, a touristy resort town, since 1995, and operates a webcam for surfers checking up on the waves. “When they started building and you could see it, I’m like, ‘Whoa, we gotta point the camera over there,’ which kind of pissed off the surfers,” said Gore, who often surfs at Boca Chica Beach. “So I pointed it back, and then that pissed off the space people, and then I’m like, ‘I gotta buy another camera.’” On a clear day, you could see the earliest Starship prototype from the southernmost tip of the island, a tiny smudge of silver jutting into the blue sky.
Brownsville residents started stopping by too. Austin Barnard, a student at Texas Southmost College, discovered SpaceX by accident, when a binge of Carl Sagan videos led the YouTube algorithm to suggest something from Musk. For Barnard, State Highway 4 is “the highway to Mars,” the first leg of a trip that humanity is destined to take. He likes to walk around the fenced-in SpaceX facilities, soaking in the sounds of the construction. At home, before he starts his homework, Barnard sometimes sits in his room in silence, practicing for the quiet isolation of a months-long mission to the planet.Residents are used to checkpoints; there’s a U.S. Border Patrol stop on State Highway 4 when you’re heading toward Brownsville and away from the Mexican border. This checkpoint was different. Instead of a border agent in a dark-green military uniform or a car-sniffing German shepherd, a SpaceX employee approached their car and asked the couple whether they were “on his list.” Workman was stunned. She and her husband have owned their home in Boca Chica for 20 years. “I should not have to be on a list,” Workman told me. “Besides that, why would a SpaceX employee have authorization to stop me on a state highway and tell me I can’t go through?” To meet safety requirements from federal and county regulators, SpaceX sets up two checkpoints during launch operations, including testing. Only SpaceX personnel and village residents can pass through the first checkpoint, about 15 miles out from Boca Chica on State Highway 4; homeowners can add names to a list, but visitors must stay on their host’s property during road closures or they risk arrest for trespassing. No one is allowed past the second checkpoint near the village, beyond any homes and closer to the launchpad, an area the FAA says isn’t safe during testing. The road closures became a fact of life in Boca Chica. So did the intrusions of SpaceX operations, which reached a new intensity. Nearly every day, beneath the sound of wind blowing through dry grass and the staccato chirps of blackbirds, there was the clanging, whirring, and buzzing of construction equipment, the high-pitched beeping of trucks in reverse and cranes climbing high, the music the workers put on to entertain themselves. The work lasted through the night, beneath the glow of industrial lights. On windy days, pieces of plastic wrap drifted away from the construction site and stuck to the yucca trees. Some residents started calling and emailing county offices, state officials, federal agencies—anybody who could tell them whether any of this was sanctioned.All the residents I spoke with—close to a dozen—told me a version of the same story. Before SpaceX, the village felt like a coastal paradise, contentedly dislodged from civilization. At night, the only light came from the distant hotel towers on South Padre Island to the north and the Milky Way overhead. Now the place felt almost claustrophobic.In August, the Cameron County sheriff dropped off notices in the village. When they hear a police siren, the memo said, residents should step outside their home. Better yet, they should consider leaving for the day. SpaceX was scheduled to conduct an important test of Starhopper, an early Starship prototype, the one mistaken for a water tower. “There is a risk that a malfunction of the SpaceX vehicle during flight will create a overpressure event that can break windows,” the notice read. “It is recommended that you consider temporarily vacating yourself, other occupants, and pets from the area.” Before the flight, which was, at the time, SpaceX’s biggest Starship test, the FAA required SpaceX to increase its liability insurance, from $3 million to $100 million. Starhopper rose into the sky, climbing to a height of nearly 500 feet before levitating back down. McConnaughey watched from a safe distance, along with some SpaceX workers, who whooped and cheered as they watched. “It was just amazing,” she said. Musk was in awe too. “Congrats SpaceX team!!” he tweeted. “One day Starship will land on the rusty sands of Mars.The letters, printed on SpaceX letterhead, arrived a few weeks later. “When SpaceX first identified Cameron County as a potential spaceport location, we did not anticipate that local residents would experience significant disruption from our presence,” the note read. “However, it has become clear that expansion of spaceflight activities as well as compliance with Federal Aviation Administration and other public safety regulations will make it increasingly more challenging to minimize disruption to residents of the Village.” (The FAA is in charge of approving SpaceX’s launch activities in Boca Chica.) The letters came with contracts, offering homeowners a deal to buy their home. Those who sold, SpaceX promised, were welcome to return for private, “VIP” launch-viewing events of Starship.The village residents had suspected that SpaceX would want them out someday. But some were still shocked by the letters, especially after they read what was inside. SpaceX had commissioned an appraisal of their properties, without their knowledge, and was now offering them three times the resulting market value. The process would be handled by JLL, a commercial real-estate company. SpaceX gave the residents two weeks to respond.
Some signed the contracts, but many didn’t want to leave. A sale at triple a property’s worth certainly sounds generous. But the appraisers SpaceX hired hadn’t even stepped inside their homes, the residents said, to see the new plumbing and air-conditioning systems they had installed, or the fresh tiling and gleaming backsplashes. JLL conducted a second assessment, and this time appraisers took pictures of the interiors. But when residents saw the new evaluations, some were insulted—the comparable homes the appraisers had listed included foreclosed houses and properties with foundation issues. (SpaceX declined to comment on property negotiations.) SpaceX still tried to be neighborly, in a way. The company invited residents to Musk’s Starship presentation days after the letters came. Those who RSVP’d rode in a sleek black van to the control center, where Musk showed off the latest Starship prototype. Afterward, the residents were herded into a room stocked with soft drinks and snacks, while elsewhere Musk took questions from reporters—including about buying out the village. When he was done, he joined them for about half an hour and, with the help of a SpaceX lawyer, tried to reassure them about the buyout process. Musk told the residents that they could stay in Boca Chica as long as they were willing to put up with the “inconveniences” of living next door to a spaceship construction site, McConnaughey said. He warned them there would be more. A week before Thanksgiving, Celia Garcia Johnson got on the phone with Elizabeth Clampitt, a senior vice president at JLL and the residents’ point of contact for the buyouts. Garcia Johnson has loved Boca Chica Beach since she was a little girl growing up in nearby Brownsville, and bought two homes in the village, one in 1991 and the other in 2004, with the hope that someday her two sons would inherit them. Like some of her neighbors, she found and paid an appraiser to conduct another review, which came up with higher values. JLL rejected the appraisal. So Garcia Johnson told Clampitt that she wasn’t taking SpaceX’s offer. Clampitt said SpaceX wouldn’t come back with another.Garcia Johnson described the conversation: Clampitt told her, “Well, I’m going to talk to you like I would talk to my mother or my aunt, someone that’s close to me. If you don’t sell at our prices, we’re going to close the books on you, and the houses are going to the county.” (SpaceX declined to comment on this conversation, and Clampitt did not respond to a request for comment.) SpaceX can’t force the residents to leave, but the county can. In 2013, county commissioners established a corporation “to assist in the promotion and development of a spaceport project” in Cameron County. Under Texas law, the corporation has the authority to exercise the same right that lets governments take over private property and compensate its owners. When we met, Treviño, the county judge, told me that while he sympathizes with the residents, the use of eminent domain in Boca Chica Village is “probably a distinct possibility.” The law is on SpaceX’s side. A 2005 Supreme Court ruling expanded the definition of public use, the legal justification for eminent domain, to include economic development, and since then, states have taken advantage of that leeway: Texas, for instance, claimed dozens of homes to make room for a new stadium for the Dallas Cowboys. “That is something, unfortunately, that happens way more than it should,” Renée Flaherty, an attorney at the Institute for Justice, a nonprofit law firm in Washington, D.C., told me.
Flaherty first heard about Boca Chica in the fall. “Those people were already there and [SpaceX] brought a nuisance to them, and now it’s escalated to the point where the nuisance is so severe that they’re telling them that they have to leave their own property,” said Flaherty, a Texas native herself. If the county moves ahead with legal proceedings, she believes that the remaining residents would have a case for eminent-domain abuse. “We’re watching the situation very closely,” Flaherty said. (She has been in touch with several residents. She doesn’t represent them, but is considering making a trip to Boca Chica.) “I don’t like to make threats, and I never do make threats, but we are watching. I think it’s probably a very good thing if they know that someone has an eye on them.” Today, Boca Chica is busier than ever: As Musk put it recently, SpaceX is “going max hardcore” on production of the new Starship prototype. Fresh cracks have appeared in the asphalt of State Highway 4, and this month, SpaceX asked federal regulators for permission to launch the newest Starship vehicle almost halfway to the edge of space sometime in 2020. Musk wants to put people on board this year too.
In the village, residents see SpaceX workers moving around the homes the company now owns, lugging in furniture and paint and carrying out old carpeting. And judging by the cars that stay parked in the driveways overnight (including Teslas, another product in the Elon Musk firmament) residents suspect that the employees have begun sleeping there. At one property, a chain-link fence has been replaced with a wooden one, and someone strung up small twinkle lights—the kind that might illuminate a cozy outdoor party—over the yard. As some residents are packing up to leave, SpaceX is settling in.For McConnaughey, watching her neighbors trickle away has been difficult. She felt a twinge of sadness when she saw SpaceX workers trimming the grassy median on her street. “It’s just something that we’ve always done,” she said.Cameron County is a far cry from Cape Canaveral, but the infrastructure to support a departure gate from Earth is slowly emerging. The county has spent millions of dollars to spruce up a park at the southern end of South Padre Island as a prime viewing spot for future launches, installing an amphitheater, event center, pavilion, and boardwalks. SpaceX has begun inviting people to Stargate, the control center in Boca Chica, to meet and interview with recruiters. Last month, the company also held a business fair in Brownsville so that the company could “learn about select products and services available from Rio Grande Valley vendors.” Gore attended, hoping, he said half-jokingly, to become SpaceX’s official surfing instructor.Like others who visit the SpaceX facilities regularly, Gore and Barnard, the space-eyed college student, know some of the residents, including McConnaughey, whom they consider a friend. They know what the homeowners are going through, and they feel bad for them. But Barnard sees their situation through a more cosmic lens. A common argument for space travel, especially Musk’s version of it, is that it is inevitable. Of course people will someday leave Earth and build homes on other planets, and Musk is the one who can get them there. Humankind is poised to become a spacefaring civilization—to find not only survival beyond Earth, but a happy life—and for Barnard, Boca Chica might be the cradle. “It sucks,” he said. “But the needs of the many outweigh the needs of the few. Star Trek.” As SpaceX plants roots in Cameron County, the company seems to be growing impatient about the people—about 20—who don’t want to leave. In mid-January, David Finlay, SpaceX’s senior director of finance, came to town and stopped into the homes of residents who haven’t sold. “He sat in my living room and he apologized because they’re making us leave,” but he said SpaceX needed them out soon, Garcia Johnson told me. When she asked about eminent domain, Finlay said he could tell Texas officials that SpaceX might leave if it can’t maintain operations here, which could prompt the county to start eminent-domain proceedings. Garcia Johnson hasn’t changed her mind.SpaceX declined to discuss the specifics of its negotiations with residents in Boca Chica and the possibility of eminent domain, and emphasized its commitment to its Texas locations. “Every single SpaceX rocket and spacecraft is tested in Texas before flying to space and back again,” said Gleeson, the SpaceX spokesperson. “South Texas will play an increasingly important role in our efforts to help make humanity multi-planetary.”Like Garcia Johnson, McConnaughey never wants to give up her home in Boca Chica, but she would do it for what she feels is a fair price, enough to find a similar home with the views and the quiet she has enjoyed in the village for years. But she can’t imagine being anywhere else, especially now. She loves documenting what SpaceX is doing, even though she knows the company wants her to leave. McConnaughey recognizes that her desires might seem difficult to reconcile, but she doesn’t feel conflicted about her hobby, which she said feels like an addiction. She doesn’t do it for the love of SpaceX. (She doesn’t see the appeal of going to Mars either—“isn’t it –80 degrees there?”—though she understands why others do.) She does it for the nasaspaceflight.com community, who encouraged her to post more pictures when she first started, and for other space fans who don’t have the view that she does. Her photos, alongside pieces by Barnard and Gore, are now on display at the Brownsville Museum of Fine Art, as part of an exhibit chronicling SpaceX’s transformation of Boca Chica. Last month, all three mingled alongside company reps at a black-tie gala to celebrate its opening.The week I visited Boca Chica, about a month before the small explosion in November, SpaceX workers had removed the nose cone and the fins of the Starship prototype, giving it the appearance of an uncapped lipstick. It was a warm, cloudless day, and the ground seemed to sizzle in the heat of the sun. Workers in hard hats and reflective vests arrived in pickup trucks. A security guard drove over and asked me to step away from the fence. If something were to fall from the crane, he said, we’d both be in trouble.The air-conditioned houses in the village were blissfully cool in comparison, and residents showed me around their homes and backyards, pointing out their seashell collections and where they drank their coffee each morning with views of the nearby bay. McConnaughey brought out a stack of notices about public hearings and launch activities she had received over the years, a paper trail documenting the residents’ rocky coexistence with SpaceX, culminating with a glossy booklet, prepared by JLL, telling them how much their homes are worth. “Nice little wooden shack,” McConnaughey said, referring to one of the properties used for comparison. “It looks lovely.”
The next day was windy and 20 degrees cooler. Heavy rain had passed through overnight, scattering palm fronds on roadways, and the bay had swelled and risen, flooding State Highway 4 just a few miles out from the village. There was no getting out, or in, until the water subsided hours later. At a hotel in Brownsville, where SpaceX puts up employees who come to work from out of town, a few technicians from the company’s facilities in California sat in the lobby. They had driven over to Boca Chica in the morning but were told to leave as the water crept up onto the highway. One of them told me they had come up so quickly on the flooding that they almost lost control of the car.
I asked them what they were going to do for the afternoon. They shrugged. “Rest,” one said. Another pointed to a brightly colored liquid in a plastic cup in front of him. “Drink.”For a few hours that day, Boca Chica Village was cut off from the rest of the world. Residents said they’d never seen the bay flood this badly before, but they didn’t seem to mind. They could pretend that the village was theirs again, even as they prepared to face the reality of giving it up. McConnaughey, Garcia Johnson, Workman, and others said they’ll stick it out for as long as they can, but they know that Boca Chica has become something else, something harder to recognize. It is a strange existence, to move through the familiar routines of their days without knowing how many are left in their shifting paradise. A security guard near the big antennae told me that some of the residents wave to him during their daily walks, and he knows some of them by name. I asked him whether he knew that SpaceX was trying to buy their homes. “I thought the county made a decision for them already,” he said. In 2013, SpaceX (the rocket company founded by Elon Musk) moved its base to a site in South Texas next to Boca Chica Village, a retirement community, after scoring a deal that included $15million in tax breaks. Since then, the company has been buying out the Texas retirement village because it wants to build a Mars prototype town called “SpaceX Village” adjacent to its Starship rocket-development and launch site. However, half the retirees are refusing to sell their homes even when SpaceX has offered them three times the base appraisal rate for their properties. The residents refuse, saying it won’t be enough to get a similar property somewhere else since there they enjoy low taxation, and there’s an undeveloped beach nearby. Now Elon Musk is reportedly ‘losing patience’ and wants his Texas neighbors to be moved out by March 31. He wishes to be able to work freely on SpaceX without risk. Musk told the residents at a meeting that he recommends they sell and move because of safety issues posed by Starship – a new spacecraft that may carry around 9 million pounds of propellants. The company’s senior director of finance even started offering flexibility to residents who are not prepared to cash in, and still, they refuse. It’s gotten to the point that the residents are in talks with non-profit legal representatives.The homes that sold have been turned into storage sites, workshops, and delivery centers. A corner store that was bought out also is now home to spacecraft-tracking antennas from NASA’s old space shuttle program.According to a new SpaceX job posting spotted by Business Insider (that has since been removed from the site), the SpaceX Village will be the company’s “private spaceport with eyes on Mars” and “an epic place to live and work.” It may feature “100 electronically bookable rooms and regularly planned activities, such as volleyball tournaments, rock climbing, kayaking, and “spaceport lounge events and parties.” The listing doesn’t say if the purpose of the village is to house SpaceX employees or to create a tourist attraction. However, Musk did tweet earlier in February that SpaceX was “going max hardcore” on Starship design and production, which likely means that employees would be working 24/7 to realize the new system. The Starship is SpaceX’s rapidly developing steel rocket system that (if realized as Musk envisions) will stand 39 stories tall and ferry 1 million people to Mars. It will also disrupt the transcontinental and international airline industry reducing the cost of access to space by approximately 99%. “We’ve got a lot of land with nobody around, and so if it blows up, it’s cool.” —Elon Musk, 2018 AT THE END OF SEPTEMBER, WHEN TENSIONS WERE AT THEIR PEAK, THE residents of Boca Chica Village received a message from SpaceX. The private space company was publicly unveiling its new spacecraft here, at the southeastern tip of Texas, and they were invited. The gesture came as a surprise. Earlier that month, homeowners in this tiny community of independent-minded retirees had received another letter from SpaceX, via FedEx. “Expansion of spaceflight activities,” it read, “will make it increasingly more challenging to minimize disruption.” Given the company’s ambitions—massive and, as the residents had come to learn, always shifting—SpaceX wanted to buy their homes. As an incentive, it had offered three times the properties’ assessed values. As an incentive of a different kind, the letter had declared that the offer, which was final, would expire in two weeks. That deadline passed three days before the rocket unveiling. Of the residents who planned to attend, not one had accepted SpaceX’s offer. The afternoon of the event, Mary, sixty-one, a wiry, practical woman who was arguably the rocket’s biggest fan in Boca Chica, painted her fingernails a sparkling silver and put on star-shaped earrings. Cheryl Stevens, fifty-nine, a former legal secretary with expressive hands and frizzled, graying hair, almost turned down the invitation—she’d been battling SpaceX for years—until she heard her neighbors were going. She borrowed a friend’s elegant teal dress—then, after spotting a neighbor in shorts, changed into something more casual. About a dozen people gathered at the cozy, cluttered home of Terry and Bonnie Heaton, seventy and seventy-one, the community’s longest-tenured residents. Cars were already streaming in from the west, through the Border Patrol checkpoint, past the wildlife preserve and its nesting shorebirds.At dusk, two SpaceX employees wearing effortful smiles herded the Boca Chicans into a van and drove them to the launch site. It was surreal to see Boca Chica so busy. A few years earlier, it had been a sleepy neighborhood of a few dozen houses on just two streets, the perfect counterpoint to the spring-break madness of South Padre Island, a few miles up the coast. Sometimes during the slow summer season, the Heatons were the only people around. In the winter, the main source of excitement was the weekly game night over at the Averys’ house. Then SpaceX chief Elon Musk took an interest in the area and began building his new rocket prototype here. Now the mile-and-a-half drive to the launch site was lined with SpaceX enthusiasts and Musk hangers-on. 
The 164-foot-tall spaceship, named Starship Mk1, loomed above the site, its stainless-steel hull gleaming in the floodlights. Mary asked if she could hug it. Her friend Gene Gore, a sunbaked surfboard builder from South Padre Island who was invited as a local SpaceX supporter, peeked inside the bulkhead and felt as though he’d entered the future. Gene and the other SpaceX fans mingled with company executives and local politicians as the Boca Chicans were ushered over to a private, cordoned-off area. Their minders didn’t let the residents out of their sight.Musk took the stage to detail his big plans: how Starship Mk1 was the first full-scale prototype of what would eventually be the biggest, cheapest spacecraft ever built, the rocket that would make humans a multiplanetary species. “This thing is going to take off, fly to sixty-five thousand feet, about twenty kilometers, and come back and land, in about one or two months,” he assured the crowd. He talked about moon bases, asteroid mining, and how fuel could be produced on Mars. It was an expansive, optimistic vision of the future, and, according to Musk, much of it was centered here, in Boca Chica. As Musk took questions from the audience, the Boca Chicans were hustled back into the van. They assumed they were heading home, but instead their minders said that a “special guest” wanted to meet with them. Musk, they presumed. They were escorted to a nearby building, where they grazed on platters of fudge and fancy chips and mingled uneasily. Another resident, Maria Pointer, received a text from a reporter she’d grown friendly with over the past several months: “Elon is talking about you guys!” 
“We are working with the residents of Boca Chica Village because we think over time it’s going to be quite disruptive,” Musk was telling the crowd. “The actual danger is low to Boca Chica Village, but it’s not tiny. So therefore, we want super-tiny risk. So probably over time it’s better to buy out the villagers.” 
An hour passed, then another. One by one, the Boca Chicans began giving up: Bonnie went home to take her medication; Ellie Garcia just got fed up and left. It was after 11:00 P.M. when Musk finally walked into the room. Here was the man they’d all been talking about for years, sometimes with excitement (Elon retweeted my picture of the rocket!), sometimes with bitterness (Elon thinks he can just have my house?). He wasn’t charismatic, but his power felt palpable in the room. Andy Goetsch, who’d moved to Boca Chica to be close to SpaceX, was giddy. But most of the other residents wanted to vent. Musk crossed his arms, assumed a stiff, wide stance, and listened as they unloaded their grievances and disputed their appraisals. Their houses weren’t just brick-and-mortar structures—you had to take into account the wildlife, the proximity to the beach, how special Boca Chica was. He did a lot of nodding.Before the meeting ended, Cheryl took a selfie with Musk, then handed him a sort of peace offering: a Mars-themed issue of National Geographic from 1977, which she’d found in a library’s giveaway pile that morning. He seemed taken aback. He reacted that way, she reasoned, because he wasn’t used to being given things; usually Musk was the one doing the giving.The next day, Cheryl received a text from someone she’d just met—a SpaceX superfan who’d flown in from California to attend the event, only to find that he couldn’t secure a ticket. So in the morning, he’d hiked over some sand dunes, passed the NO TRESPASSING signs he’d claim not to have seen, sidled up to the rocket, took a selfie, and posted it on Facebook. The company had seen his photo and considered it proof of trespass. “I’m in handcuffs, please call my mom,” the superfan wrote to Cheryl. SpaceX was pressing charges. WHEN I FIRST VISITED BOCA CHICA, IN OCTOBER, I WAS STARTLED TO SEE the rocket sitting out in the open, by the side of a public highway. When Jeff Bezos decided he wanted to venture into space and founded Blue Origin to do so, he quietly bought up three hundred thousand acres of remote west Texas ranchland so he could experiment in seclusion. Richard Branson opted to base his private space company, Virgin Galactic, at Spaceport America, a facility owned and operated by the state of New Mexico. But Musk has always done things differently. “Head down, plow through the line. That’s very SpaceX,” the company’s president, Gwynne Shotwell, has said. And in this case, the line ran right through Boca Chica. (Neither Musk nor SpaceX would comment for this story.) 
The area isn’t the most obvious place to build a home base for space exploration. Cell service is spotty. The nearest grocery store is a half-hour drive away. Freshwater is nonexistent; it must be trucked in each month. “Everything out here rusts, rots, and mildews,” a former resident told Texas Parks & Wildlife magazine in 1992. “And the dust off the flats can blow something awful!” That hasn’t stopped developers from targeting the area over the years. Musk is only the latest outsider to arrive here with big ambitions. But nothing before has stuck, mostly due to the hurricanes. In 1867, a hospital and barracks built down the road from the site of the Battle of Palmito Ranch, arguably the Civil War’s last land skirmish—which the Confederates won—were washed out to sea. Between the world wars, tourists frolicked at a seaside resort—the author Sherwood Anderson caught several “gorgeous redfish” there, according to his wife’s diary—until, in 1933, another hurricane, with a thirteen-foot storm surge and 124-mile-an-hour winds, wiped it away, too. A Moon Motor Car flipped over on the beach and in time became nearly buried in sand, where it remained for three decades, until Hurricane Beulah (twenty-foot surge, 136-mile-an-hour winds) uncovered it. In the sixties, a schemer named John Caputa began pitching Polish communities in the greater Chicago area on a beautiful retirement village in Boca Chica. He called it Kennedy Shores, in homage to the president, and he promised investors an improbable 12 percent return. Few bought into the dream, and Caputa completed only a fraction of the planned development. A few years later, he died, penniless, of a heart attack. In time, the community changed its name first to Kopernik Shores, in homage to Copernicus, then to Boca Chica Village. But most of the houses that now stand are Caputa’s. The Heatons bought one of them in 2001. Fed up with Minnesota winters, they’d decided to retire somewhere warm and quiet and affordable. They’d planned to go to South Padre Island, but a barge accident destroyed a portion of the bridge, rendering it inaccessible. Someone suggested they check out Boca Chica, a dozen miles down the coast, and they never left. Many residents arrived here like the Heatons: accidentally, while trying to get someplace else. They felt as though they’d stumbled on a secret shared only with their neighbors, and with the day-trippers from nearby Brownsville. The community marks the eastern edge of the Lower Rio Grande Valley National Wildlife Refuge, a two-hundred-mile stretch of federally protected land along the southern border, intended to allow safe passage for animals such as the ocelot, whose U. S. population has dwindled to fewer than one hundred. For a certain kind of person—one who prizes independence over convenience and who doesn’t mind living among more pelicans than humans—there was no better place on earth. Sitting in their living room, Bonnie told me how the seclusion suited her and her husband, and the fishing was world-class. In the winters, Bonnie cut her neighbors’ hair and Terry helped out with their home repairs. Most of their neighbors were part-timers, returning to their homes in Alaska or Michigan or Wisconsin during the hot months. I asked Bonnie if it got lonely during those quiet summers, and the question seemed to make her feel sorry for me. “It was wonderful,” she said. “It was wonderful.” But that was before SpaceX and its intrusions. “They don’t want us here because it’s costing them money to have us here. But we were here first,” she told me. “This is where we thought we were going to live until we died.” Cheryl, who lives a few doors down from the Heatons, decorated her house with seashells and left out dishes of water for migratory birds. She paid her mortgage by renting out her house on Airbnb. In the summer, sea turtles lay their eggs on the beach; once, she helped a nest of hatchlings find their way to the sea. Another time, in the eerie calm before a hurricane, she saw a jaguarundi—a rare wild cat that has since gone extinct in Texas. She befriended Wiley, the half-tame coyote who skulked through the village at dusk. Cheryl grew up in south Texas, the fourth generation of her family to play on Boca Chica Beach. As an adult, she lived in Austin until it got too crowded and expensive; then she moved to Portland and repeated the process. When her grandmother got sick, she returned to Texas and, in 2005, bought one of the Caputa houses; if anywhere was safe from the exhausting logic of gentrification, she figured Boca Chica was it. So when Musk started sniffing around, she told me, “those of us who lived here hoped [the project] would implode, or he’d run out of money.” Cheryl’s shell collection is rivaled by that of Rob Avery, sixty-six, a retired pipe fitter with graying copper hair, and his wife, Sarah, sixty-three, who used to work in insurance. On their daily walks along Boca Chica Beach, the couple has found oyster beds, rare shells, bison teeth, and even a remnant of a centuries-old shipwreck. They spend six months each year in Boca Chica and recently became Texas residents so they could relocate permanently. When the offer letter from SpaceX arrived at their other home, in Connecticut, “we were floored,” Rob told me. “It made you feel that if you didn’t accept this offer, eminent domain would be the next step,” Sarah said. Rob added, “We felt under duress. We were caught off guard.” He paused. “We’d had two deaths in the family,” he said. “It couldn’t have been a worse time.” Feeling that they had no choice, the Averys signed the paperwork and rushed down to Texas six weeks earlier than usual, prepared to pack up their house and say goodbye to Boca Chica. When they arrived, they saw the partially assembled Starship Mk1 rocket for the first time. Some of their neighbors refused to look at it. Others couldn’t look away. ONE MORNING, BEFORE DAWN, I HEADED TOWARD THE LAUNCH SITE IN search of the burgundy van that always seemed to be in its vicinity, as close as you could get to the rocket without SpaceX security shooing you away. The van belonged to Mary. She and her husband, Gale, seventy-eight, retired to Boca Chica twelve years ago. They loved the community, with its neighborly solicitude—one time, Mary helped Cheryl get TV reception by jerry-rigging an antenna out of scrap lumber and coat hangers. But unlike her NIMBY-minded neighbors, Mary was intrigued by the community’s transformation into a space corridor. Her interest spiked in November 2018, when SpaceX began assembling Starhopper, the squat prototype built to test the company’s methane-fueled Raptor engine, which, if all goes to plan, will one day propel the Starship fleet into space. “That’s when I fell in love with a rocket,” she sang, to the tune of T-Pain’s “I’m in Love with a Stripper.” 
Mary spent most days by the side of the road, observing the rocket and its surroundings as if it were her full-time job—never mind the heavy heat of the Texas summer or the dense swarms of mosquitoes that arrive after the rains. She doesn’t have an engineering background, but she has a keen observer’s eye, and she started posting pictures and videos of the project’s developments on Twitter, as @bocachicagal. She averaged twenty tweets a day, and she had a fondness for the star-eyed emoji. Space obsessives took notice. She’s now a go-to source for on-the-ground updates out of Boca Chica. As of press time, she’s amassed nearly seventeen thousand followers. 
Mary was joined that morning by two other rocket enthusiasts, Gene, the surfboard builder, and Andy, the Musk fan who moved here because SpaceX did, too. Andy is a retired IT technician; when he learned that the houses in Boca Chica were cheap, he bought one, rigged it to run on solar panels hooked up to a Tesla battery, and waited for the launches to begin. That was four years ago. We clambered up the beachfront dunes to get a better view of the rocket. The vibe was celebratory, even though today’s activities were relatively low-stakes: SpaceX was transporting Mk1’s ninety-foot cylindrical propellant tank over from the assembly site. The launch area, mostly unpaved and at least one-quarter puddle, had an ad hoc feel, like a haphazard construction site. A stone’s throw away sat Starhopper on its three fat legs. A white sign was posted on the chain-link fence: NOTICE: SEA TURTLE NESTING SEASON IN PROGRESS. There was something dizzyingly improbable about this futuristic hardware plopped down amid the seagrass, beside the indifferent storks wading carefully through the mudflats. “It’s not made out of some super-high-tech carbon composite,” Gene was enthusing about Mk1’s hull of stainless steel—a material vastly cheaper than carbon, with a higher melting point. “It’s not some super-secretive thing. It’s like—you can buy this crap at the hardware store.” 
“It’s just—it makes people stutter, like I’m doing now,” Andy said. “These guys come out in the middle of the desert with some plumbers and welders, and they just start building something. Started welding it together out here, in the open.” Mk1 was omnipresent, impossible to avoid unless you never looked southward. Still, Mary, Gene, and Andy—and the rocket’s other local fans—couldn’t get enough of it. Seven years after SpaceX began buying up their backyard, there was finally something to see. Since Musk founded SpaceX, in 2002, the company has relied on government-owned sites, Cape Canaveral in Florida and Vandenberg Air Force Base in California, to launch its rockets. But doing so chafes against Musk’s desire to get things done his own way, at his own pace. In 2005, SpaceX was temporarily booted from its launchpad at Vandenberg at the request of Lockheed Martin, which had raised concerns that the newcomer’s rocket would explode and damage nearby infrastructure. Musk was outraged. “Somebody else builds a house next to you and tells you to get out of your house,” he said at the time. “Like, what the hell? . . . We’re going to fight that issue, because it is just fundamentally unfair.” 
Building its very own commercial orbital launch site—the world’s first—would free SpaceX from such hassles. In 2011, the company began scouting. The location would need to be close to the equator—better for the launch trajectory—with a low population and a welcoming local government. SpaceX quickly narrowed down its options to three: Florida, Puerto Rico, and Boca Chica. Musk, it turned out, had a knack for Texas politics. That year, he invited Cameron County officials to SpaceX headquarters, in Hawthorne, California. The following year, the company upped its force of Texas lobbyists from one to five, and Rick Perry, then the governor of Texas, wrote in a letter to the Federal Aviation Administration, “Please know that I strongly support the efforts of SpaceX and the Brownsville community to bring this business to Texas. I ask you to favorably approve their application.” SpaceX formed a shell company, Dogleg Park LLC, named for the path its rockets would zag to avoid passing over populated areas, and later another called the Flats at Mars Crossing LLC, and began scooping up properties at the local sheriff’s sale. The land was cheap, in part because it was difficult. Roads washed out all the time; in the spring, sand swirled in the fifty-mile-per-hour gusts. Even so, in 2013, at a hearing before the appropriations committee of the Texas state legislature, Musk laid out his vision for “the commercial version of Cape Canaveral.” He was there to support two bills intended to lure SpaceX to the state. One would reduce a private space company’s liability in the case of a nuisance complaint; the other, written by the congressman from Brownsville, would empower county officials to deny access to public beaches when “spaceflight activities” were on the calendar. In his speech, Musk was by turns encouraging and coy. “Texas is our leading candidate right now,” he told the room. But also, “any support Texas can offer will be helpful.” Perry signed both bills into law. SpaceX spoke loftily of up to twelve launches each year. Each month, one of the company’s rockets—a Falcon 9, its workhorse, or a Falcon Heavy, the most powerful rocket in operation—would shoot into the sky, destined for the International Space Station, or perhaps beyond. According to Brownsville’s then mayor, Tony Martinez, Musk told him, “One day, you are going to read that a man left Brownsville and went to Mars.” Local officials were flattered by the attention, but they also saw an opportunity. Brownsville is the country’s poorest metropolitan area; in recent years, if it makes national news at all, the stories pertain to the crisis at the southern border. “Anything positive, people are hungry for it,” Juan Montoya, a local political blogger and lifelong Brownsville resident, told me. SpaceX was promising nothing short of an economic transformation, estimating it would create five hundred local jobs at an average salary of $55,000. The Brownsville Economic Development Council claimed the economic impact would be a “game changer for the region” in a PowerPoint presentation used to sell the community on the idea. Sure, the launches might occasionally shut down Boca Chica Beach, one of the state’s few remaining stretches of undeveloped coastline—a place Montoya described to me as “the poor people’s beach” for the role it serves for the residents of Brownsville—but the trade-offs would make the sacrifices worthwhile. The BEDC conservatively estimated that fifteen thousand people would come watch each launch. “Nobody really knows very much about Brownsville,” Martinez told me. “But if you talk about SpaceX and Brownsville, now you’ve got a marketing tool. You want to go watch the launch? Well, you gotta go to Brownsville.” Riding high on his promise of economic expansion, Musk didn’t encounter much resistance. The city, county, state, and University of Texas system put together an incentive package worth nearly $40 million. “Elon says—‘Man, you guys need a new airport.’ Even though he doesn’t fly commercial,” Martinez recalled. “And we’re building a new airport.” Finally, the deal was done. In 2014, Musk and then-governor Rick Perry posed together, their shovels stuck in a mound of sandy soil, at the groundbreaking. The company renamed streets—Joanna Street was now Rocket Road. THINGS GOT OFF TRACK ALMOST IMMEDIATELY. CREWS DRILLED IN SEARCH of bedrock on which to build a launchpad but didn’t find any. Instead, they learned that when you dig a hole on the mudflats, murky water soon seeps in. If SpaceX needed solid ground in Boca Chica, it would have to create it. So the company trucked in 310,000 cubic yards of earth, then waited three years for the soil to settle. Musk had agreed to protect fifty acres of wetlands via land transfer to the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service. When the approval didn’t move forward at the pace SpaceX expected, the company convinced the feds to allow the land to go to the state of Texas instead. Musk had claimed the project would be an operational spaceport by 2016, but that year came and went, with not much to show other than an expensive pile of dirt. For years, the main sign to Boca Chicans of SpaceX’s presence was the company’s steady accumulation of houses and vacant lots—as of press time, it owns more than 150 properties in the area—as well as the procession of reporters who began knocking on their doors, seeking their take on living next to a spaceport, albeit one that didn’t yet exist. In the press, residents opposed to their new neighbor voiced their distaste. Terry and Bonnie Heaton appeared most often, perhaps because they were the only year-round residents. With a clear-spoken folksiness, the couple explained to one outlet after another—The Brownsville Herald, the Houston Chronicle, The Washington Post, the Los Angeles Times, the New York Post, NPR—how SpaceX was intruding on the golden years of retirement they’d looked forward to for so long. Boca Chica homeowners were invited to meet with SpaceX in 2015. Musk wasn’t there, but his representatives made several reassurances: They’d provide ample advance warning for all launches; they wouldn’t close the beach on summer weekends. They wanted, the company told the Boca Chicans, to be a good neighbor. Meanwhile, SpaceX was struggling with more than just dirt. A Falcon 9 rocket disintegrated on a flight to the ISS in 2015, and another exploded the following year. Musk was also putting out fires of his own making: In 2018, NASA rebuked him for getting stoned with Joe Rogan. This came after his tweets drew the ire of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which fined him $20 million and forced him off the board of his own electric-car company, Tesla. Then, in the midst of the drama, Musk made headlines when he called a heroic cave diver in Thailand a “pedo guy.” But SpaceX worked hard toward improvement, and it paid off. The company was launching more mostly reusable rockets, sending more successful missions to the ISS. Its Falcon spacecraft were proving reliable enough to earn the company billions of dollars in government contracts. And then Musk decided he needed a new space vehicle—one theoretically capable of interplanetary travel—to set in motion the next ambitious phase. At first, SpaceX referred to this next-generation spacecraft as the BFR—the Big Fucking Rocket; eventually, it was rechristened Starship. 
Last May, the company quietly filed paperwork with the FAA indicating that its plans for Boca Chica had changed. Instead of being a commercial launch site to send Falcon rockets into orbit, it was now home to SpaceX’s “experimental test program,” through which the company would design and build Starship. And because Starship was now central to SpaceX’s vision of its future, Boca Chica was, too. The government required the company to up its liability insurance from $3 million to $100 million, largely because of the residents’ proximity, but otherwise approved the pivot. None of this was immediately apparent to the people of Boca Chica, however. All they knew was that since the fall of 2018, the area had been buzzing with activity. White pickups and heavy machinery clogged the boulevard; SpaceX workers scurried around “like a bunch of ants,” as Bonnie put it. The company had opted to build its rockets outside—constructing a building would take too long, Musk said, and floodlights illuminated the rocket-assembly area throughout the night. The generators never stopped humming, and employees banged on the prototypes around the clock. Maria and her husband, Ray, whose home is closest to the rocket-assembly site, could see the welders’ acetylene torches spark from their bedroom window long after midnight. The couple put a webcam on their roof, which transmitted a round-the-clock YouTube stream of SpaceX activity. Some of Cheryl’s Airbnb renters requested refunds; they had expected Boca Chica to be a quiet retreat, and instead it was a 24/7 construction site. (In October, when I rented Cheryl’s place, I could hear the rumblings of Starship’s construction from her backyard.) This past summer, as Mary documented the construction of Starhopper, activity continued to ramp up. In July, the prototype successfully completed a “hop”—that is, it lifted sixty feet in the air, moved laterally, and landed back down—then ignited a hundred-acre brush fire. The fire was frightening, but what frustrated Cheryl the most was how the county seemed to bend over backward to accommodate the company. A sheriff’s deputy was stationed across from the launch site, keeping guard. At SpaceX’s request, Boca Chica Beach was closed at least half a dozen times between June, when the temperature in Brownsville was already hitting triple digits, and August, which marked that month’s second-hottest average on record in Texas. Every time the company was up to something big—which seemed to be every couple weeks—the only road to Boca Chica was blocked off, essentially trapping the residents in their homes. The beach road was shut down again the October day I stood on the dunes with Mary, Gene, and Andy, so Mk1 could be moved. We watched the Starship prototype slowly roll down the road and inside the gate, where it came to a stop. Up close, I could see dents in its silvery hull. They made the rocket seem friendlier somehow, almost relatable. For a long while, nothing happened. A small crowd had gathered and was growing restive; due to the roadblock, no one could leave until SpaceX was finished, and it was already an hour behind schedule. A red SUV with a HOOKED ON JESUS bumper sticker pulled up to the sheriff’s road barrier. It was Terry, back from his morning fishing expedition. He, too, was told he could not pass. “This is a load of crap,” he said, brandishing a printout from the county that said the road should’ve been reopened an hour and a half ago. He said he was diabetic and needed to go home to get his insulin. “My hand’s already shaking,” he said. His house was right there, just a mile away. He started to slowly roll forward. “You can’t,” the deputy said. “You’ll be arrested.” Terry’s face reddened, but he stopped and waited for the rocket business to finish. BY MID-FALL, BOCA CHICA VILLAGE BEGAN TO FRACTURE. THE HOMEOWNERS who had accepted the buyout offered in September felt judged by the holdouts; the holdouts felt betrayed by the sellers. Everyone wanted to know how much money their neighbors ended up with. Mary was no longer speaking to Maria, whose coverage of SpaceX’s snafus—like when Starhopper’s nose cone blew off in a big gust of wind, and when it burst into flames after a static fire test—she found distasteful. She also claimed that Maria tried to use the @bocachicagal handle as her own. (Maria disputed the accusation.) Mary changed her Twitter bio to read, “My name is NOT Maria.” In October, SpaceX made some concessions to the holdouts, extending the offer deadline by a few weeks and arranging for more-thorough appraisals. The initial valuations had been based on drive-by assessments and hadn’t taken into account many of the improvements the homeowners had made. But the revised appraisals weren’t much better, and the company made it clear they wouldn’t extend the deadline again. Once it expired, the three-times offer would be off the table. The Heatons hosted a meeting with a prominent eminent-domain lawyer in their living room. The good news, the lawyer told the assembled residents, was that they were sympathetic; any jury was likely to feel for them, and perhaps rule in their favor. The bad news was that getting to that point meant engaging in an ugly, expensive, protracted legal battle that they may well lose. Take the money, he advised, unless you’re really in this for the long fight. It was hard for residents to believe they’d be formidable opponents. Perhaps the biggest threat to ever face SpaceX’s concern in south Texas was Donald Trump’s “big beautiful” border wall, with a proposed pathway that would have bisected the launch site. But members of Congress had successfully lobbied to adjust the wall’s path to protect five places: a state park, a butterfly sanctuary, a wildlife refuge, a historic church, and SpaceX’s Boca Chica operation. (A lawyer from the Institute for Justice, a legal-aid nonprofit that specializes in eminent-domain cases, is in touch with several Boca Chica homeowners.) In mid-November, as Mary and her camera watched from down the road, Mk1’s bulkhead suddenly shot up into the sky; the rest of the rocket disappeared behind a billowing plume of nitrogen. The boom was so loud that Gene heard it on South Padre Island, eight miles away. The rocket the Boca Chicans had watched from infancy had just blown up during a pressurization test; it wouldn’t be traveling to space after all. SpaceX spun the incident as not “a serious setback,” since crews were already working on an updated version, the Mk3. After the accident, activity at the construction site got even more frantic, as if the company was trying to make up for lost time. The Pointers covered their windows with hurricane shutters to block out the noise and light from the round-the-clock construction, but Ray still wasn’t sleeping well. Eventually they decided to make a deal with SpaceX, although Maria didn’t feel happy about it. “This tiny little spit of land is so important,” she said. “And that I got to live, breathe, and experience it? In the last house on Texas [Highway] 4 before you get to the ocean, in a beach villa with gorgeous views, and a frickin’ rocket shipyard on both sides? You can’t pay a person enough for that.” Even Cheryl, with her keen sense of justice, was considering selling to SpaceX. Being in a constant state of outrage exhausted her, and she worried about her Airbnb income drying up. Then, one morning in November, the Heatons were gone. Word around town was that they had sold to SpaceX. (After our initial conversation, the Heatons didn’t reply to further interview requests.) The news stunned Cheryl. Not only had the Heatons been vehement opponents of SpaceX, “they’re really the foundation of everything here,” Cheryl said. “Not just mowing everybody’s lawn, but when things break. . . . They had everyone’s keys. And they’re like, ‘We’re out of here.’ You can’t blame them, but I wish they would’ve communicated with us.” Now who would you call if your pipe sprung a leak? By then, the Averys had decided to rescind their acceptance of the buyout. The offer had been framed to seem generous, but the appraisal had valued their sunny three-bedroom, two-bathroom home, with broad views of the bay, at only $47,000. As they looked at real estate nearby, they were dismayed. For $141,000—SpaceX’s offer—“we couldn’t even find a fixer-upper,” Rob said. The prospect of leaving behind the home they’d spent fifteen years improving to instead spend their retirement somewhere cramped, hemmed in by other houses, and far from the beach was disheartening. They hadn’t yet signed over their deed nor accepted SpaceX’s money. Rob and Sarah told me that if Musk wanted to sue them for breach of contract, so be it. Even if things devolved into a lengthy court battle, at least they would have a few more years in Boca Chica. In the days after the Mk1 explosion, dead sea turtles began washing up on the beach. On their morning walks, the Averys saw two dozen of them. Sixty-three corpses were found in all, according to a local turtle-protection group. The deaths were determined to be related to illegal fishing, but the incident threw into sharp relief the fragile world in which SpaceX was expanding its empire. THE MORE I READ ABOUT SPACEX, THE MORE I realized how radical its vision of the future actually was—not so much its hypothetical journeys to Mars but rather its near-term ambitions. The company is seeking approval to launch forty thousand satellites as part of its Starlink program, a Google- and Fidelity-funded endeavor to bring high-speed Internet to rural areas and expedite international financial transactions. Starlink would allow SpaceX to capture a portion of the trillion-dollar global telecommunications industry. If all goes according to plan, there will be five times as many SpaceX-launched satellites in the sky as visible stars. Starship—and therefore Boca Chica—is key to making this a reality. A Falcon 9 rocket can hold several dozen satellites, a Starship several hundred. Musk has said that he’d like to see as many as three launches a day from Boca Chica. “I did the calculation—that’s more than nine billion pounds of fuel per year,” said Dave Mosher, a reporter for Business Insider who covers SpaceX. “I don’t think you can get the fuel there fast enough.” Even correcting for Musk’s characteristic overstatements, it seems likely that Boca Chica will soon be less a poor people’s beach or a community of fixed-income retirees than a busy industrial corridor. Indeed, the beginnings of a liquefied-natural-gas export facility at the Port of Brownsville are already visible on the horizon. And so when I returned to Boca Chica in late December, I imagined I’d find a depressed, depleted place. Instead, after a tumultuous year, the community seemed infused with a fresh spirit. Residents seemed to have come to terms with SpaceX’s presence, for better or worse. The rocket might be intrusive, but it was their neighbor, and unlike them, it was here to stay. For some, that was an incentive to hash out an agreement with the company. “I jumped ship before it sank,” Cheryl told me. We were sitting in her living room, among the thrift-shop decor she’d carefully amassed over her fifteen years here. “I’m going to find a cheap home somewhere else, probably in a different state, since I’m disgusted with Texas. And I’m going to try to re-create my life.” SpaceX had granted her until March to move out, and she was determined to make the most of her final winter by the beach. 
Others were resolved to fight. As of press time, a dozen homeowners still refused to sell. Some thought they might get a better offer from SpaceX if they waited—a risky gamble, since the company said the three-times offer was off the table. Others just wanted more time. The holdouts also included the rocket’s biggest fans in Boca Chica. By now, Mary was a micro-influencer to the rabid community of SpaceX fans worldwide. Andy told me, “People go to Florida and pay a thousand dollars to watch a rocket launch there. I can say I turned down $200,000 to watch a rocket launch.” I got the sense that after spending so much time watching Starship get built, neither one wanted to leave it behind. One moody, misty afternoon, Rob and Sarah Avery took me on a drive along Boca Chica Beach. We cruised down to the mouth of the Rio Grande. Two men with fishing poles waded into the surf; Mexico was just a coin toss away. I tried to picture the fuel-production facilities, the fleet of reusable rockets, the tens of thousands of SpaceX satellites spangling the night sky. As with so many of Musk’s visions, it seemed at once difficult to take seriously and dangerous to dismiss. At the launch site, expansion continued apace. Earlier that month, SpaceX had announced that it was winding down activity at its other rocket facility, in Cocoa, Florida. Components were salvaged and sent on a chartered ship to Texas, where the company installed an enormous white tent to shield its work from the very thing that had rebuffed so many outsiders before them: the weather. The towering, matte-black wedge-shaped windbreak they’d erected wasn’t doing the trick. “Our main issue here in Boca,” Musk tweeted, “is that it can get very windy.” 
Back at Boca Chica Village, Mary was by the side of the road again, keeping an eye on things. This week, she was photographing the crews as they assembled the skeleton of an enormous building. It seemed as though the next version of Starship, now called SN1, would be built inside, out of the sight of its critics and fans. Even so, Mary would keep taking pictures as long as she could, even if she was only documenting her own exclusion.SpaceX Selected by NASA for Artemis Moon Mission May 5, 2020 NASA named SpaceX as one of three U.S. companies selected to design and build spacecrafts capable of landing humans on the moon for the agency’s Artemis program.The other two companies selected by NASA for the Artemis program are Blue Origin of Kent, Washington, and Dynetics of Huntsville, Alabama, according to a news release from U.S. Rep. Filemon Vela.One of these three companies will carry the next person to the moon by 2024. The three contracts are worth $967 million for a 10-month base period. Funding was allocated under the Next Space Technologies for Exploration Partnerships. “NASA’s selection of SpaceX for the development of human landing systems is great news for the South Texas economy,” Vela said. “This program will create local jobs as well as increase educational opportunities for students, scientists and researchers. I am committed to supporting SpaceX and fellow community leaders as we move forward with this exciting and transformative project. SpaceX, which is planning a second attempt Saturday at its first astronaut launch, has had a big impact on two small Texas communities.The Elon Musk company has a Rocket Development Facility in McGregor, Texas, and a Space Launch Facility in a fixed-income retirement neighborhood by the beach called Boca Chica in Brownsville, Texas.Brownsville has an average home price of $85,900, according to U.S. government data website DataUSA. Its population is 182,083, and median household income is $35,636.Satellite imagery shows about 35 houses in Brownsville's Boca Chica neighborhood, according to an October report from The Los Angeles Times. The Times said the assessed value of homes in the retirement community ranges from $24,000 to $149,000.The arrival of SpaceX has brought good-paying jobs and economic development to the Brownsville area, according to space fanatic and photographer Austin Barnard, a 22-year-old college junior from East Texas studying aerospace. "I can name 30 people I know who work at SpaceX who got hired in the last three months," Barnard told FOX Business. "And they just graduated college."Some of those jobs are for welders making $35/hour. "My dad always told me everyone in Brownsville is corrupt," said Barnard, whose dream is to go to Mars one day. "But Elon doesn't care about the politicians or what anyone else thinks. He's a free man. He believes in freedom of speech. ... He feels that American spirit inside. You can do anything you want, as long as it's not too crazy." He said that after SpaceX came into the area, shoddy roads have been repaved, stores like Dick's Sporting Goods and Best Buy have arrived, a new academy has opened, and a planetarium could be on the way. Before the pandemic, new plazas were opening up, too. But SpaceX's move into Boca Chica has also been rocky for some residents, who have complained of construction noise, notices of early-morning rocket launches and closures "This quiet community by a wildlife preserve now had 24/7 construction, big trucks at all hours, bright lights at night, awful disruption," Monroe wrote. "What does this mean? A sheriff's deputy bangs on your door at 10 p.m. and tells you there's a rocket test that night between 3-4 a.m. Now, this is a mile from your house. And every previous rocket has blown up." SpaceX has offered to buy Boca Chica residents' homes for three times the assessed price, and most have accepted the offer, former resident Maria Pointer told FOX Business.
SpaceX did not respond to an inquiry from FOX Business. Pointer, who sold her home just outside Boca Chica to SpaceX in 2019, told FOX Business that there are only seven people left who haven't moved. Cameron County officers have to notify residents of launches ahead of time so they can step out of their homes or leave town for a day, because if something goes wrong, there is a chance windows can shatter or other damage can put residents in danger, The Atlantic reported in a profile of the small town in February.
"People don't understand how clean and beautiful and pristine Boca Chica was," Pointer said. "It was that last place in the U.S. that was untouched and accessible ... to retirees, right on the ocean. It was a sanctuary for everything: Turtles, birds, an eight-mile-long beach." Brownsville Mayor Trey Mendez did not respond to an inquiry from FOX Business. "When SpaceX first identified Cameron County as a potential spaceport location, we did not anticipate that local residents would experience significant disruption from our presence," SpaceX wrote in a note to residents, according to The Atlantic. The letters added that "expansion of spaceflight activities as well as compliance with Federal Aviation Administration and other public safety regulations will make it increasingly more challenging to minimize disruption to residents of the Village." Pointer said she doesn't blame Musk for the disruptions or the fact that she had to leave her home. She supports the company's mission. In fact, she said she spoke to Musk directly, and he wanted to help. She blames Cameron County officials for not seeking the input of residents before SpaceX moved in. A positive for Pointer: she has made something of a career out of taking photos and videos of the company's developments from her backyard under the name "Boca Chica Maria" on social media. "We were documenting history from our backyard," she said. Things have gone more smoothly in McGregor, population just over 5,000.SpaceX has been testing rocket engines there since about 2002, when the company was founded, but the town put restrictions on what times the company can perform these tests in 2016 to limit noise disruptions, according to local news website the Waco Tribune-Herald. Noise in the town has a threshold of 115 decibels -- about the noise volume of a loud motorcycle, the outlet reported, citing the Center for Hearing, Speech and Language. If SpaceX does not adhere to the town's limitations, it must pay a fee of $7,500 and discuss the situation with city officials.
The average home price in McGregor is $98,400, according to DataUSA. The town has a population significantly less than that of Brownsville at 5,056, and the median household income is $40,000, the website shows.Residents in the town have fewer complaints about the engine-testing facility than residents in Boca Chica have with the launch site.
"In five years, I've gotten one complaint from someone who lives in McGregor and one complaint from someone who doesn't live in McGregor. If people are complaining, they're not doing it to this office," city manager Kevin Evans told the Tribune-Herald.The planned launch will be the first time NASA has worked with a private company to send people into space, marking a historic moment for the U.S. private space technology industry and the government.Ellen Tyma and Dan Griffen built their retirement home 15 years ago on the banks of the Rio Grande to spend the days kayaking, jet skiing and enjoying the river. But since SpaceX built its South Texas launch facility 12 miles away, their quiet lives have been upended. Now, without warning, the main road leading to their home and a popular beach is frequently closed for test launches, including twice last week.
The couple and other South Texans say when SpaceX was wooing the community in 2013 to develop its site here, they billed it as a launch facility — not a testing facility.
Since opening, SpaceX’s mission and projects at the facility have substantially changed and many residents now want more federal regulation on the activities at this site. They also want another environmental impact study done to ensure that these added tests do not pose a threat to communities or nearby wildlife, especially after the recent May 29 explosion of a rocket engine during a test — caught on camera by Border Report — and a July 2019 brush fire ignited by another test.Border Report asked the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA,) the agency in charge of oversight of this facility, whether current SpaceX activities comply with agency regulations stipulated in the FAA’s 2014 final Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), which allowed SpaceX to build its Texas Launch Facility a half-mile from Boca Chica Beach on the Gulf Coast in an ecological wetland where sea turtles nest in rural Cameron County.Border Report was told the FAA had not approved significant plans that SpaceX has for the facility since the company told the agency it had switched projects and is now using this facility to develop a new, massive spacecraft to travel to Mars, called the Starship. The FAA also said it has begun a new environmental review of the company’s new plans.“The current testing falls within the current EIS. However, a full-scale Starship launch site falls outside the scope of the 2014 EIS. The FAA is in the early stages of an environmental review. Any proposal must meet the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the FAA’s policies and procedures for conducting a NEPA review,” an FAA official wrote in an email to Border Report on Friday.When SpaceX asked the FAA for permission to build the world’s first commercial space launch facility in South Texas, it told the agency and South Texas communities that this site would be used to launch its Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy rockets. Subsequent environmental assessments conducted by the FAA allowed for up to 12 launches of the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy per year — not the Starship with its super-heavy rocket that stands nearly 400 feet tall and is being developed to haul in excess of 100 metric tons to Earth’s orbit, and eventually to Mars.
SpaceX’s Raptor rocket engines, which are reusable combustion engines that power the massive Starship spacecraft, are already being tested at the South Texas launch site. In fact, it was a test firing of a Raptor engine on May 29 that caused the concussive and fiery explosion of a Starship prototype. The blast was felt 5 miles away on South Padre Island and shook locals who now say they are very concerned about what is truly going on at the SpaceX facility.The FAA said testing of the Raptor rocket engines is OK. But environmentalists and South Texas residents, like Tyma, disagree.She said SpaceX has done a “bait and switch” from what they originally said this facility would be used. She and others told Border Report they now worry about the potential harm to humans and area wildlife that this new project and increased testing could cause. “We attended the original meetings on how they were going to be a ‘good neighbor’ and have ‘a minimal impact’ and the only time they were going to be an inconvenience was when they were going to launch the Falcon Heavy and that would be when they requested the residents in the (Boca Chica) Village might want to evacuate for 24 hours during those launch times. Now, it’s become a testing facility where the roads are blocked, we have to show ID to come to our homes,” 61-year-old Tyma said recently as she and her husband sat on their boat dock overlooking a dozen horses drinking from the Mexican side of the riverbank. “We’re like mushrooms, they keep us in the dark. Nobody tells us anything,” she added.
Tyma said the couple attended an FAA public hearing in May 2013 and said SpaceX officials told them there would be no more than 12 launches of the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy per year, and only then would Highway 4 close on the way to their home and Boca Chica Beach. “And they said it would be more like just six launches,” she said, adding that Starship was never mentioned.“Now, they’re closing a public beach whenever they choose. It was only supposed to be a maximum of 12 times per year. We’ve exceeded that 10 times over in this year already,” said Tyma, who is originally from Rockville, Md.In the past month, Cameron County officials have issued 13 orders to close the beach due to SpaceX testing. There also have been several days that the orders have been revoked, but residents like Tyme and Griffen say they just want to go to their local beach, not spend hours looking at the county’s website to see whether it is open, or whether the highway will be closed on any given day.“Boca Chica Beach is a state park, not only a county beach. They just do what they want to do,” said Griffen, 77, a retired truck driver.Border Report has repeatedly reached out to SpaceX for comment to this story but has not received a response. Stefanie Herweck, an environmental studies professor at a South Texas college and member of the nonprofit Save RGV, also attended the May 2013 FAA public hearing, as well as several “scoping” meetings where she said the FAA was supposed to determine the necessary scope of evaluation to ensure the safety of all residents and the environment when dealing with a multi-million dollar facility of this kind. Herweck said the Starship spacecraft was never brought up and its impact was not studied, according to the May 2014 EIS final report. She said “the FAA is shirking their regulatory duties and they’re not doing due diligence” by allowing SpaceX to conduct tests of a completely different rocket product so close to the fragile wetland ecology, and South Texas homes and public beaches.“Any large project like this has to be vetted and has to go through a series of scientific evaluations in order to determine the safety, the effects on that environment and the effects on communities and on people’s lives,” Herweck said. “The project that they were going to do completely and fundamentally changed. There is no Falcon Heavy rocket being launched and instead they are testing the Starship and they went forward with this idea for this to be a testing facility. That’s a completely different set of activities and it has completely different impacts. However, the regulatory agency that is was supposed to be guiding this environmental impact process, the FAA, allowed SpaceX.”Five years after the FAA issued its Final Environmental Impact Statement, the agency issued a 23-page “Written Re-Evaluation of the 2014 Final Environmental Impact Statement for the SpaceX Texas Launch Site,” on May 21, 2019, that acknowledged SpaceX had switched from the Falcon program to the Starship project that included a new “experimental test program.” But Herweck, who is familiar with environmental assessment protocols, says the agency failed to inform the public of this information. And she says at this point a new EIS should have been conducted.“The FAA allowed SpaceX, just to write up a 23-page document that describes how they’re going to change it,” Herweck said. “And they kind of just rubber-stamped it and essentially allowed SpaceX to write a ‘P.S. we’re changing it entirely.'”Three months later, in a 5-page addendum issued by the FAA on Aug. 21, 2019, the agency signed off on the change, saying no further environmental study would be needed. “The data contained in the 2014 EIS remain substantially valid, that there are no significant environmental changes, and that all pertinent conditions and requirements of the prior approval have been met or will be met in the current action. Therefore, the preparation of a supplemental or new environmental document is not necessary,” the report said. In the past year, locals say, construction at the facility has increased tremendously in size and scope. And SpaceX founder and CEO Elon Musk recently said on social media he “is buiding” a floating launch platform near Brownsville, Texas, presumably in the Gulf of Mexico. A map listed in the May 2019 Written Re-Evaluation shows the company wants to put a 30-foot-tall methane flare stack to vent methane. The document says “up to three tons of methane would be remaining in a reusable test vehicle, and that “SpaceX is currently working to design a safe method to transfer the methane back to the tanks and reduce the amount of methane released.” Herweck said an EIS can take sometimes years to complete and involves scientists investigating potential effects to humans and wildlife from excessive noise, light, chemicals in the air and ground, as well as effects to groundwater and the economic losses to local economies from test closures.
The metamorphosis of this facility, which sits on tender tidal flats and feet from sand dunes where sea turtles lay eggs, has largely gone unnoticed and under the radar in this border community where environmentalists say they are strapped between fighting the construction of Donald Trump’s border wall through the region, and the development of three new liquefied natural gas facilities at the deepwater Port of Brownsville just 5 miles from SpaceX. More hangars and buildings have been built 1.5 miles from the test launch pad, where SpaceX has its administrative offices, and more and more cars line the sand dunes across from the complex, and unless one travels often the 21-mile stretch of Highway 4, also known as Boca Chica Highway, that leads to the beach and passes by the SpaceX complex, it might not be so noticeable. But a June 6 tweet by SpaceX CEO and Founder Elon Musk where he called this facility his “Starship Production Complex Boca Chica, Texas” caught the attention of environmentalists. Jim Chapman, president of the Friends of the Wildlife Corridor, a nonprofit support group for South Texas’ Santa Ana National Wildlife Refuge and Lower Rio Grande Valley National Wildlife Refuge, has written several FAA officials since the May 29 explosion asking whether SpaceX’s South Texas site is a test facility or a launch facility and for a new environmental study. On Monday, Brian Rushforth, FAA chief of staff for the Office of Commercial Space Transportation, replied to Chapman via email confirming the Starship development at this site and indicating a new environmental review by the federal agency would be done. “SpaceX has informed the FAA that its future plans are to eventually conduct suborbital test flights of the Starship prototype and then operate a full-scale Starship launch site at Boca Chica. A full-scale Starship launch site falls outside the scope of the 2014 EIS. The FAA is in the beginning stages of conducting an environmental review of SpaceX’s Starship proposal in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and the FAA’s policies and procedures for conducting a NEPA review (FAA Order 1050.1F),” Rushforth wrote. But just a day later, Rushforth [FAA] apparently tried to walk back his comments, writing to Chapman: “I’ve been told since yesterday the new process may be an EIS, or it may be an Environmental Assessment (EA). Either way, we are starting a new environmental analysis.” Chapman and Herwek say the assessments are very different, and they want the FAA to begin a new and extensive vetting via a formal EIS and hold open public hearings. “We believe that the environmental impact statement should have been redone whenever they changed their purpose of the facility in the first place. And what we’d like to see is not only that there’s a new environmental impact statement for these new changes but that they did actually go back and look at the stuff they’re doing right now and speak to those kinds of activities,” Herweck said.Chapman added that it needs to be done quickly since Musk tweeted on June 16 that SpaceX “is building” a “floating” launch platform. Said Griffen as he sat on his dock behind his house: “Now, Elon’s talking about building a floating platform off Boca Chica to launch rockets. What will be next?” The Federal Aviation Administration allowed SpaceX to pick the type of environmental review it wanted done on its controversial South Texas launch facility, and the aerospace company chose the quicker and easier route that requires no public hearing or comment period, the FAA told Border Report. This is the same facility where a SpaceX rocket engine exploded on May 29 during a test, sending a fireball into the air near Boca Chica Beach on the border with Mexico. In a letter sent to the head of a South Texas environmental nonprofit organization, an FAA official wrote that “applicants have the right to choose whether to conduct an Environmental Assessment (EA) under FAA oversight or work with the FAA to initiate the EIS (Environmental Impact Statement) process. If an applicant believes the proposed action would have no significant environmental impacts, or that they can mitigate any potential impacts, then the applicant typically chooses an EA. … SpaceX has begun an EA for the action of issuing experimental permits or launch licenses to SpaceX for Starship/Super Heavy launch operations at the Texas Launch Site.” The letter also said that the agency has reached out to three other federal agencies to help monitor the situation. The letter by Howard Searight, deputy manager for the Licensing and Evaluation Division for Commercial Space Transportation for the FAA, was sent to Jim Chapman, president of the Friends of the Wildlife Corridor. Chapman was among seven environmental group leaders who earlier this month called on the FAA to launch a full-scale EIS of the SpaceX launch facility, which borders several wildlife preserve areas and is located just feet from where endangered sea turtles nest. On Friday evening, the FAA sent the letter to Border Report, which has repeatedly asked for clarification and explanation on the type of environmental review currently being done on the South Texas facility. The agency also released a statement to Border Report late Monday defending its regulation of the space industry and of SpaceX. But a couple environmental groups tell Border Report that the letter the FAA sent is full of policy errors. Chapman said the agency is violating federal laws by allowing the applicant to pick its own review. “The FAA letter is way off-base. It is the FAA, not the applicant, who decides whether a proposed project requires an EA or EIS,” Chapman said. “If it was the applicant who decided then nobody would ever chose to do an EIS because that’s a longer process and more expensive to do.” Federal regulations from the FAA stipulate rules that must be followed under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA): “Chapter 3: Levels of National Environmental Policy Act Review 3-1. Three Levels of National Environmental Policy Act Review. Once the FAA determines that NEPA applies to a proposed action, it needs to decide on the appropriate level of review. The three levels of NEPA review are Categorical Exclusion (CATEX), Environmental Assessment (EA), and Environmental Impact Statement (EIS),” according to the FAA’s 2015 orders, which states “Under NEPA, the FAA must prepare an EIS for actions significantly affecting the quality of the human environment.” Border Report last month broke the story that the FAA had ordered an environmental review of the SpaceX facility because the company is now preparing a different space vehicle — the massive, 400-foot-tall Starship — which it wants to one day launch humans to Mars from South Texas. When the company initially requested license and permitting for the facility in 2014, it said it would launch a smaller spaceship, the Falcon Heavy, and received FAA approval based on that information. At the time, SpaceX was granted permission to launch no more than 12 times per year from this site. But local residents say when the company changed plans, it became a multi-testing facility unlike it was initially billed to the South Texas community. Environmental groups are concerned about the harmful effects the testing of Starship, which is being designed to haul over 100 tons of payload, poses to neighbors and wildlife tracts. And it is even suspected that the heat from the test launches could affect the sex of the eggs the endangered Kemp’s ridley sea turtles lay on the sand dunes of Boca Chica Beach, about a half-mile from the launch facility. “It’s real clear from the get-go that there will be very significant impacts and given that, they should go straight to the EIS and let the public in,” Chapman said. “SpaceX now wants to more than triple the closure of Boca Chica Beach and Highway 4 and you don’t think the public should get to weigh in on that decision? Boy I sure do. … There’s all kinds of impact that in my mind scream out that it should be investigated.” Border Report has reached out to SpaceX officials for comment and will update this story if information is received.Concerns about environmental impacts became more pronounced after Border Report on May 29 captured the explosion of a test of a raptor rocket engine at the South Texas facility. After it was learned that an environmental review was being done, Chapman and others sent the FAA a letter demanding an EIS. Among the groups was the nonprofit Defenders of Wildlife, whose Texas representative, Paul Sanchez-Navarro, told Border Report on Monday that the FAA should not allow the applicant to select what type of review it wants done. “Jim (Chapman) is correct, it is not a question of choice, the business must follow federal regulations. From what I understand, a Supplemental or new EIS should be done,” Sanchez-Navarro said. “There is no room for arbitrary choices.” “In the meantime, the FAA should make sure that SpaceX complies with the mitigation work outlined in the permit and any new work to expand the project beyond the original EIS should be put on hold until a new EIS is approved,” he said. In the letter, the FAA did stipulate that the agency still might conduct an EIS, writing: “All applicants run the potential risk that further review may uncover significant impacts that cannot be mitigated. In those cases, the FAA must conduct an EIS.” The FAA said it “has invited the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Parks, Service, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to participate as cooperating agencies.” and to “actively participate” in project meetings and provide input on “potential impacts.” But Chapman claims that because the FAA promotes space travel, regulating it, in this case, shows a conflict of interest. “The FAA regulates and promotes the U.S. space program so it appears they don’t want to put any significant hurdles at SpaceX,” Chapman said. And current laws, it seems, do not allow for another agency to step in and take over, he said.FAA officials responded to the charges Monday telling Border Report: “The Federal Aviation Administration’s continuing mission is to provide the safest, most efficient aerospace system in the world. The FAA’s Office of Commercial Space Transportation manages licensing and regulatory work as well as encourage, facilitate, and promote commercial space launches and reentries by the private sector; and facilitate the strengthening and expansion of the United States space transportation infrastructure. The agency’s uncompromising focus is on public safety. A July 3 letter from several environmental groups to the Federal Aviation Administration requested that a new environmental review of SpaceX’s Boca Chica operations be conducted, because those operations bear little resemblance to what the FAA originally approved for the site.The FAA responded on July 17 that a new Environmental Assessment (EA) is in fact underway, though Jim Chapman, president of Friends of the Wildlife Corridor and the main drafter of the July 3 letter to the FAA, told The Brownsville Herald that an EA is insufficient considering the magnitude of SpaceX’s impact and that SpaceX should perform the more rigorous Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) instead. Further, it’s not up to SpaceX to decide which type of review to conduct, as the FAA contends, but rather the agency itself, Chapman said.The Hawthorne, Calif.-based company received permission from the FAA in 2014 for up to 12 commercial rocket a launches a year from Boca Chica, which SpaceX said at the time would be the world’s first commercial spaceport. Instead, the site has become the locus of SpaceX’s ambitious Starship development program. This has involved round-the-clock construction of Starship prototype components, expansion of the company’s build yard and launch/test pad facilities, preparations to build the Starship’s “Super Heavy” booster stage, and frequent closures of Boca Chica Beach and State Highway 4 for testing — well beyond what 12 or fewer launches a year would have called for.The company’s activities have also involved the kinds of events one would expect where experimental spacecraft development is underway, including disruptive prototype failures and so far one genuine explosion, which occurred on May 29 when Starship prototype SN4 was destroyed on the test stand in a massive fireball.The July 3 letter to the FAA was signed by Chapman and representatives of the environmental groups Save RGV, Friends of Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge, Defenders of Wildlife, Frontera Audubon Society, Center for Biological Diversity, and the Lower Rio Grande Valley Sierra Club Group. It urged the FAA to “develop a new or supplemental Environmental Impact Statement for SpaceX’s current and planned actions at their Boca Chica site.” The letter noted that the company’s activities are “significantly different and greater in scope than the project the FAA authorized in its 2014 Record of Decision (ROD), and these actions are having significantly greater human and environmental impacts.” In its July 17 response, the FAA said SpaceX has proposed operation of the Starship/Super Heavy launch vehicle at Boca Chica, but to do so the company “must obtain an experimental permit or launch license from the FAA Office of Commercial Space Transportation.” The issuance of such permits or licenses constitutes a “major federal action under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and requires a new environmental review beyond the 2014 EIS,” according to the FAA. The letter also states that, under NEPA, an applicant can opt for an EA with FAA oversight if the applicant believes the proposed action — Starship/Super Heavy operations in this case — won’t have a significant environmental impact or that the impact can be mitigated. “However, all applicants run the potential risk that further review may uncover significant impacts that cannot be mitigated,” according to the FAA letter. “In those cases, the FAA must conduct an EIS.” The FAA said it has invited the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services, National Park Service and NASA to participate as active cooperating agencies in the EA that SpaceX has already begun. Chapman’s view is that the environmental impact of SpaceX’s modified operations is profound enough that it will probably require an EIS ultimately, which leads him to question the usefulness of an EA.“We feel that there’s almost no question that there are significant environmental impacts with the new operation,” he said. “The sheer number of tests and the likelihood of … accidents, explosions and so forth.” Chapman said the pace of Starship prototype construction and testing at Boca Chica is “a pretty amazing thing” but that it’s a far cry from the original plan of 12 or fewer launches a year. “There are going to be significant impacts, so why waste the time and the effort to go through an EA and then to have to do an EIS because the impacts are significant? Why not do an EIS right off the bat? It just makes sense,” he said. Chapman wrote back to the FAA in response to the agency’s July 17 letter and argued that it is the FAA, not the applicant, who decides whether to pursue an EA or an EIS. He quoted an FAA policy that states: “Once the FAA determines that NEPA applies to a proposed action, it needs to decide on the appropriate level of review.” The three levels of NEPA review are a Categorical Exclusion, an EA or an EIS, according to the policy. “The other thing is that with an EIS public participation is mandatory,” Chapman said. “There will be a public hearing and there will be a public comment period. With an EA, that’s all optional. If the agency wants to they can open it up to public comment or have a public meeting, but they don’t have to. There’s no law that says that that’s required. This needs public participation.”
It’s especially important that the public be involved because access to Boca Chica Beach and Brazos Island State Park is steadily eroding due to SpaceX’s intensive testing schedule, which forces closure of S.H. 4 and the beaches with increasing frequency, he said. “The public has a very vested interest in how all this plays out,” Chapman said. “And by doing an EA, that allows the FAA and SpaceX to basically ignore the public. In the most basic sense, this is going to affect the public. They need to have a voice. They need to be able to speak their views.Environmental organizations spotlight inadequate oversight by FAA of SpaceX’s Boca Chica testing facility, call for an EIS In a letter sent to the Federal Aviation Administratio(FAA), environmental groups are calling on the agency to require a new Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) that fully details the impact of the SpaceX Boca Chica testing and launch site.The groups, including Save RGV, Defenders of Wildlife, Frontera Audubon, Friends of Laguna Atascosa National Wildlife Refuge, the Center for Biological Diversity and the Lower Rio Grande Valley Sierra Club claim that recent disasters at the facility are a sign that the safety and environmental impact of SpaceX operations have not been adequately studied and disclosed to the public. The letter also lists numerous stipulations that SpaceX has failed to uphold and that the FAA has failed to enforce. On May 29, SpaceX’s Starship Prototype exploded into a massive fireball during an engine test. The explosion was felt as far as the town of Port Isabel, Texas, more than 5 miles away and residents there could smell the smoke. This was the latest in a series of explosions and uncontrolled fires at the facility.ders of Wildlife/Paul Sanchez-Navarro The safety implications and environmental impacts of a rocket test of this sort were never fully studied and vetted because the FAA did not require SpaceX to do so. The 300-page environmental review they completed in 2014 under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) stated that the facility would be used solely as a monthly launch site for the Falcon 9 and Falcon Heavy Rockets. Hearings were held to allow local residents to learn about the project and provide input, as required under NEPA. However, between 2014 and 2019, SpaceX changed the project profoundly. It transformed its site from a launch site for the Falcon rockets to a testing and launch facility for the much larger Starship and Heavy Booster. Rather than requiring a new EIS detailing the potential impacts of the expansion and transformation of the site, and a new opportunity for the public to ask questions and express concerns, the FAA simply allowed SpaceX to submit a 23-page summary of the new facility.“SpaceX basically told the FAA that they were changing the project completely, and the agency just rubber-stamped that, without requiring studies, and without involving the public,” said Jim Chapman of the Friends of the Wildlife Corridor. “They went from proposing a few launches per year of an already field-tested rocket to ongoing experimentation of untested technology without doing the studies that would ensure environmental protection and public safety and without giving the local community a chance to have a say.”The letter calls on the FAA to remedy this with a new, rigorous EIS and a robust process for soliciting public comments. The groups point out several instances where the FAA has failed to enforce SpaceX’s compliance with the conditions that were placed on their activities. They note that in the EIS, beach closures due to operations at the Boca Chica site were limited to 180 hours per year. However, the closures announced in just the past 3 months add up to over 225 hours, with numerous last-minute revisions and revocations that make it difficult for the public to know when the beach will be accessible.The FAA has also failed to enforce SpaceX’s commitments to do bird surveys, monitor vegetation and work with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service to preserve habitat for endangered and threatened species like the ocelot, jagarundi and Northern aplomado falcon. “SpaceX is operating in one of the most pristine stretches of the Texas coast, in an area that is rich with biological diversity and home to numerous endangered species, including ocelot and Kemp's ridley sea turtles,” said Paul Sanchez-Navarro of Defenders of Wildlife. “We need the FAA to do its due diligence as a regulatory agency and ensure that the company minimizes and mitigates the impacts of its project on this special place.” SpaceX has already announced an expansion of the Boca Chica facility in order to launch the Starship, which would be among the largest rockets ever launched. Given the fact that Boca Chica is much closer to communities than other major spaceports, and that three massive LNG export terminals are planned only 5 miles away, the groups express concern about the FAA’s objectivity when it comes to safety evaluations.Maria Galasso of Save RGV said, “The FAA has already demonstrated that they are willing to rubber-stamp SpaceX’s plans and look the other way when the company does not meet its commitments, how are we supposed to trust them when they say launching massive rockets just 5 miles away from South Padre Island and Port Isabel and the LNG export terminals is safe?” After months of delays and testing setbacks, a prototype of SpaceX’s Starship next-generation reusable launch vehicle made a brief “hop” flight Aug. 4 at the company’s South Texas test site.The Starship SN5 vehicle, powered by a single Raptor engine, lifted off shortly before 8 p.m. Eastern at SpaceX’s site in Boca Chica, Texas. The flight was intended to reach an altitude of 150 meters, although SpaceX did not disclose the exact altitude the vehicle reached.After flying a short distance sideways, it descended to a landing on a nearby pad about 45 seconds after liftoff. Six landing legs, tucked underneath the skirt surrounding the engine bay, deployed shortly before landing.The test did appear to have some minor issues. Video of the flight released by SpaceX showed some debris flying off the launch stand after liftoff, while part of the Raptor engine appeared to be on fire as the vehicle descended. Neither appeared to affect the flight of the vehicle.SpaceX Chief Executive Elon Musk was pleased with the test. “Mars is looking real,” he wrote in a series of tweets shortly after the flight, referring to his long-term goal of going to Mars to make humanity multiplanetary. “Progress is accelerating.”However, this test flight is months behind a schedule Musk set last September. “This thing is going to take off, fly to 65,000 feet, about 20 kilometers, and come back and land, in about one or two months,” he said at an event at Boca Chica, referring to a prototype known as Mark 1 standing behind him.That prototype, though, was destroyed in a tanking test last November. Three other Starship prototypes were destroyed in later tests, including the SN4 vehicle that exploded after a static-fire test May 29. At the event last September, Musk vowed to have reached orbit with the vehicle by now. “This is going to sound totally nuts, but I think we want to try to reach orbit in less than six months,” he said then, a schedule he thought to be “accurate to within a few months.”Around the time of that event, SpaceX was facing criticism from NASA for appearing to devote more attention to Starship than its Crew Dragon commercial crew vehicle, which the agency was counting on SpaceX to complete to enable the return of human orbital spaceflight to the United States.NASA Administrator Jim Bridenstine, in a tweet the day before that event last September, expressed his concerns bluntly. “Commercial Crew is years behind schedule. NASA expects to see the same level of enthusiasm focused on the investments of the American taxpayer. It’s time to deliver.”SpaceX did deliver with the Demo-2 mission, which successfully flew two NASA astronauts to the International Space Station and returned them to Earth Aug. 2 after a two-month mission. Bridenstine said he was pleased, recalling those earlier comments.“I want to tell you, Elon, you responded absolutely magnificently,” Bridenstine said at an Aug. 2 ceremony at Ellington Field, near the Johnson Space Center, to welcome back the astronauts. “You have delivered beyond anything any of us would have expected.” Musk was at the same event, calling the successful Demo-2 flight the beginning of a “new era in space exploration” that included going to the moon and Mars. “We’re going to go the moon. We’re going to have a base on the moon. We’re going to send people to Mars and make life multiplanetary,” he said. SpaceX hasn’t disclosed details about upcoming tests, although Federal Aviation Administration temporary flight restrictions to support hop tests remain in place through Aug. 6. “We’ll do several short hops to smooth out launch process, then go high altitude with body flaps,” Musk tweeted.